Docs/internals.adoc, before:


== Internals ✗

=== Actors ✗

==== Mailbox

image::internals/sendMessage_diagram.png[]

==== Supervision

image::internals/faultHandling_mailbox_poc.png[]

==== Suspension / future plans


=== Wire Protocol

#These are simplified WIP things while we work things out and then propose a proper protocol format.#


==== Handshake

Swift Distributed Actors is P2P, and other than connection establishment "server" or "client" does not really matter.
For purpose of establishing a handshake however we will use the terms "client-side" and "server-side",
even though after the nodes have an association in place, they are equally able to perform all actions
and the connection is used in full-duplex mode.

Handshake, initiated by "client-side"

"Client-side"
- allocate WIP association (not ready yet)
- store handshake in progress
- send `HandshakeOffer`
  - contains this nodes `UniqueNode`,
  - and `Address` of target

"Server-side"
- accept connection and receive `HandshakeOffer`
- validate and allocate `Association`, the association is complete on this end already
  - an Association is "ready" when it has both `UniqueNode`
    - TODO: Assign an UID to an association as well to easier identify it, when we send data in envelopes
- send back `HandshakeAccept` with
  - own `UniqueNode`


Data formats:

We currently do:

```
  0                   1                   2                   3
  0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
 +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
 |    Handshake Magic (0x5AC7)   |       Payload length          |
 +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
 | SLAP THEM PROTOBUFFS HERE                                     |
 +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+

 Contains:
   - unique address of origin
   - address of destination
```

#TODO: we may want to have handshake be inside envelope? not sure yet#

#I would like to be able for the initial message to already contain data. It would also allow us
to perform "quick sends" where we just send Handshake with data, and mark that this is already last message;
This would work well and nice on QUIC, tho on TCP we don't care. It would enable connectionless "just send this one thing" more nicely.#

```
  0                   1                   2                   3
  0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
 +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
 |    Handshake Magic (0x5AC7)   |           Version             |
 +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
 | Flags         |          Total Payload Length                 |
 +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
 | Capability requirements                                       |
 +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
 | Payload (SysMsg, Msg; OR just Msg)                            |
 +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+

   - Flags:
     - S - System Message present
     - M - Metadata present

 Contains:
   - unique address of origin
   - address of destination
```

Reply with

```
 Contains:
   - unique address of original origin
   - unique address of self
```

Thanks to replying with unique address origin can now create an association.


[plantuml]
....
title Successful association
hide footbox
participant "Local" as L
participant "Remote" as R


L -[#blue]>  R: HandshakeOffer(version,selfUniqueAddress,opts)
R -[#blue]-> L: HandshakeAccept(uniqueAddress, selfUniqueAddress, selfVersion, acceptedOpts)
activate L
deactivate L
....

[plantuml]
....
title Rejected association
hide footbox
participant "Local" as L
participant "Remote" as R

L -[#blue]> R: HandshakeOffer(version,selfUniqueAddress,opts)
R -[#red]-x L: HandshakeReject
....

==== Envelope

```
  0                   1                   2                   3
  0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
 +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
 |S| Flags       | Lane ID                                       |
 +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
 ( [IF S == 1] Sequence number of system message                 )
 +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
 |         SerializerId          |
 +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
```


=== In memory core concepts

==== Association

Established between two nodes.

Only "associated nodes" may talk to one another.

Rules:

  - don't talk to strangers
    * nodes MUST handshake before exchanging any messages

=== *RemoteControl

Control objects allow performing actual actions onto the network layer.

These are exposed to actual refs and used to e.g. send messages.
There can be many remote controls, but always one association for a pair of nodes.

==== Watch and clustering

In case of a clustered system, the `FailureDetector` drives decisions about when a node should be marked as leaving/down etc.

Any actor, when it performs a watch of a remote actor (known by the presence of an address in the actor's path),
also registers to be notified about termination of given address.

Upon determining a remote node is terminated, the local `FailureDetector` signals all local actors that have been watching
at least one actor on given (now terminated) address, by sending an `.addressTerminated` system message to them.

From there on, each actor automatically handles this system message, by triggering a api:Signals/Terminated[enum] signal,
for each of the actors it has been watching on this address. This way the sending of terminated signal is as parallel as many there have been watchers.
And each actor utilizes as much time to process its _own_ watched actors as it has watched, so actors which did not watch any remote actors
are not awoken to perform any checks.


#TODO consider and explain races of lookups; should be correct by construction (since a watch needs a message send) but do make sure#

==== Vocabulary

- peer - any "peer", could be an actor or a node, used in peer-to-peer / gossip situations
- member - a member of the cluster, participating in gossip and with its own lifecycle etc
- node - any node we are talking to, it may not YET be part of the cluster, i.e. every member is a node, but not every node is a member
- convergence - a situation in which "we know that all other members know" about some information at some given time T (usually in "vector clock time")
- leader - a leader is a special member within within membership, and may perform special tasks; Leaders are NOT guaranteed to be globally unique (!), it is just a role filed by some node
- *Control - common pattern for an actor based thing to expose a subset of operations as a "control object", e.g. "RemoteControl" (pun intended), "GossipControl" etc.

Commit message:

+doc #439 Cluster docs revamp, full page with samples and discussions

Docs/internals.adoc, after:


== Internals ✗

=== Actors ✗

==== Mailbox

image::internals/sendMessage_diagram.png[]

==== Supervision

image::internals/faultHandling_mailbox_poc.png[]

==== Suspension / future plans

=== Cluster

==== Gossip

Membership gossip is implemented using "seen tables" and api:ConvergentGossip[class].

Membership is known to be "converged" if all members have at least seen the same - or later - version of a local membership.
This is tremendously important e.g. for removing nodes, which may ONLY happen when a member was previously seen down.
Thanks to issuing the `.down -> .removed` only under convergence, we can guarantee that all members have definitely
seen the now removed node as `.down` before, thus the removal will be interpreted correctly as such, and not as a new node
that the other side knows about, but we did not.

=== Wire Protocol

#These are simplified WIP things while we work things out and then propose a proper protocol format.#


==== Handshake

Swift Distributed Actors is P2P, and other than connection establishment "server" or "client" does not really matter.
For purpose of establishing a handshake however we will use the terms "client-side" and "server-side",
even though after the nodes have an association in place, they are equally able to perform all actions
and the connection is used in full-duplex mode.

Handshake, initiated by "client-side"

"Client-side"
- allocate WIP association (not ready yet)
- store handshake in progress
- send `HandshakeOffer`
  - contains this nodes `UniqueNode`,
  - and `Address` of target

"Server-side"
- accept connection and receive `HandshakeOffer`
- validate and allocate `Association`, the association is complete on this end already
  - an Association is "ready" when it has both `UniqueNode`
    - TODO: Assign an UID to an association as well to easier identify it, when we send data in envelopes
- send back `HandshakeAccept` with
  - own `UniqueNode`


Data formats:

We currently do:

```
  0                   1                   2                   3
  0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
 +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
 |    Handshake Magic (0x5AC7)   |       Payload length          |
 +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
 | SLAP THEM PROTOBUFFS HERE                                     |
 +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+

 Contains:
   - unique address of origin
   - address of destination
```

#TODO: we may want to have handshake be inside envelope? not sure yet#

#I would like to be able for the initial message to already contain data. It would also allow us
to perform "quick sends" where we just send Handshake with data, and mark that this is already last message;
This would work well and nice on QUIC, tho on TCP we don't care. It would enable connectionless "just send this one thing" more nicely.#

```
  0                   1                   2                   3
  0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
 +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
 |    Handshake Magic (0x5AC7)   |           Version             |
 +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
 | Flags         |          Total Payload Length                 |
 +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
 | Capability requirements                                       |
 +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
 | Payload (SysMsg, Msg; OR just Msg)                            |
 +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+

   - Flags:
     - S - System Message present
     - M - Metadata present

 Contains:
   - unique address of origin
   - address of destination
```

Reply with

```
 Contains:
   - unique address of original origin
   - unique address of self
```

Thanks to replying with unique address origin can now create an association.


[plantuml]
....
title Successful association
hide footbox
participant "Local" as L
participant "Remote" as R


L -[#blue]>  R: HandshakeOffer(version,selfUniqueAddress,opts)
R -[#blue]-> L: HandshakeAccept(uniqueAddress, selfUniqueAddress, selfVersion, acceptedOpts)
activate L
deactivate L
....

[plantuml]
....
title Rejected association
hide footbox
participant "Local" as L
participant "Remote" as R

L -[#blue]> R: HandshakeOffer(version,selfUniqueAddress,opts)
R -[#red]-x L: HandshakeReject
....

==== Envelope

```
  0                   1                   2                   3
  0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
 +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
 |S| Flags       | Lane ID                                       |
 +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
 ( [IF S == 1] Sequence number of system message                 )
 +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
 |         SerializerId          |
 +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
```


=== In memory core concepts

==== Association

Established between two nodes.

Only "associated nodes" may talk to one another.

Rules:

  - don't talk to strangers
    * nodes MUST handshake before exchanging any messages

=== *RemoteControl

Control objects allow performing actual actions onto the network layer.

These are exposed to actual refs and used to e.g. send messages.
There can be many remote controls, but always one association for a pair of nodes.

==== Watch and clustering

In case of a clustered system, the `FailureDetector` drives decisions about when a node should be marked as leaving/down etc.

Any actor, when it performs a watch of a remote actor (known by the presence of an address in the actor's path),
also registers to be notified about termination of given address.

Upon determining a remote node is terminated, the local `FailureDetector` signals all local actors that have been watching
at least one actor on given (now terminated) address, by sending an `.addressTerminated` system message to them.

From there on, each actor automatically handles this system message, by triggering a api:Signals.Terminated[enum] signal,
for each of the actors it has been watching on this address. This way the sending of terminated signal is as parallel as many there have been watchers.
And each actor utilizes as much time to process its _own_ watched actors as it has watched, so actors which did not watch any remote actors
are not awoken to perform any checks.


#TODO consider and explain races of lookups; should be correct by construction (since a watch needs a message send) but do make sure#

==== Vocabulary

- peer - any "peer", could be an actor or a node, used in peer-to-peer / gossip situations
- member - a member of the cluster, participating in gossip and with its own lifecycle etc
- node - any node we are talking to, it may not YET be part of the cluster, i.e. every member is a node, but not every node is a member
- convergence - a situation in which "we know that all other members know" about some information at some given time T (usually in "vector clock time")
- leader - a leader is a special member within within membership, and may perform special tasks; Leaders are NOT guaranteed to be globally unique (!), it is just a role filed by some node
- *Control - common pattern for an actor based thing to expose a subset of operations as a "control object", e.g. "RemoteControl" (pun intended), "GossipControl" etc.
